our 850 million dollar commitment also
includes support for vaccine development
through the Coalition for epidemic
preparedness innovations and the WH OHS
solid Alice or Ladera T trial that helps
hospitals share information on
treatments the more we cooperate the
more likely that we find a cure and find
it quickly and that's something we all
want to see if Peter debuted that case
also consult the beginning of the crisis
we've been concentrating on what happens
here in Canada we've been working hard
to ensure this safety of Canadians and
to prepare them to restart our economy
while protecting our frontline workers
but coded 19 is a worldwide prompt
problem and everyone has to do their
share the contribution of Canada to the
global fight against kovat 19 now will
be over it will be eight hundred and
fifty million dollars this includes
investments and Canadian research as
well as worldwide research it also
includes the implementation of the
Coalition for epidemic prepare
preparedness and work done by the WH o
which encourages a sharing of
information among hospitals by working
together we're maximizing our chances of
finding a cure quickly and this is what
all countries and all citizens of the
world what challenge but it's not the
first time the Canadians have been
called to do their part
over the past generations Canadians have
time and time again stepped up in
defense of our shared future this week
marks the 75th anniversary of the
liberation of the Netherlands and a
Victory in Europe day from the fall of
1944 to the spring of 45 thousands of
Canadians pushed back the occupying
forces Road by road town by town they
fought and many died to defend the
values that we hold dear peace and
democracy the rule of law
Human Rights and today 75 years later we
remember their courage and their
sacrifice earlier this morning I spoke
with Mark Richt a the prime minister of
the Netherlands we talked about the
close lasting bonds of friendship that
exists between our two countries we
talked about how we collaborated
together in years past standing for our
values fighting side-by-side and how
we're doing that again today in this
global crisis in friendship and in
solidarity so today I ask all Canadians
to join me and our friends and allies in
the Netherlands at 2:00 p.m. eastern
time to observe two minutes of silence
in honor of our veterans as we pause
let's reflect on how each of us can live
up to their example maybe you'll do your
part by staying home to protect our
health care workers
maybe you'll bring groceries to an
elderly neighbor or make a donation to a
food bank or simply make the effort of
sending a postcard to a veteran to thank
them for their service with your actions
you're contributing to your community
and demonstrating the Canadians time and
time again we'll continue to step up I
know the weather is getting nicer we
still need to be extremely careful and
not just for our seniors but for
everyone around us so don't go out
unless you absolutely have to but if you
do keep two metres apart from each other
set seven mass or some case Yemeni
vessel this week marks the 75th
anniversary of the liberation of the
Netherlands and victory day in Europe in
1944 1945 thousands of Canadians pushed
back occupying forces one village at a
time they fought and many gave their
lives to defend the values that we hold
dear to
seventy-five years later we remember
their courage and their sacrifice at
2:00 p.m. Eastern Time I invite all
Canadians to join me to observe two
minutes of silence in the honor of our
veterans during these two minutes let's
think of how we can all live up to their
example maybe you'll do your share by
staying at home to protect our health
care workers by making a donation to a
food bank or by writing a postcard to a
veteran to thank them for their service
each and every one of us can help in our
community but regardless of what you do
continue to stay at home and to keep two
meter distance among yourselves thank
you just a reminder one question one
follow-up operator thank you well see
first question Caitlyn Garrow
Bloomberg line open hello Prime Minister
we've heard from Canadian airlines that
the government is studying what is
happening elsewhere to help the sector
and they're getting a lot of aid from in
other countries and they are direct
competitors of the Canadian industry so
I'm wondering what exactly is your
government looking at to help the
airline sector beyond the wage subsidy
and why is it taking so long to roll
this out we have in Canada a very strong
airline sector and we we need to
continue to have a strong airline sector
once this is all done so of course we're
looking very carefully at how to support
industries like that that are so
important to Canada and to Canadians but
one of the key things that we were able
to do right off the bat which helped
massively in the airline sector and
elsewhere was move forward on the Serb
and the wage subsidy ensuring that
Canadians can continue to keep their
jobs even as they stay home they
continue to have that link to their
employers is going to allow our economy
to come back stronger and the damage
done by this kovat 19 pandemic to be
minimized we will have more to say about
sectoral supports in the future but for
now the support that we've given to
workers right across the country
is making a very real difference Musa
Volker on every name together we know
that we we have a strong and competitive
airline industry before this pandemic
and we will after the pandemic as well
but during this crisis it's important to
support industries and especially
workers this is why we put forth the CRB
and also the wage subsidy program to
make sure that people were able to stay
at home but to have money to pay for
groceries and to pay for the rent also
to make sure that when the economy will
restart we will still have jobs to go
back to and they will have a link to
their job and their employer we will
have more announcements to make on how
we're going to specifically eight
different industries that have been hard
hit by this pandemic such as the airline
industry but right now the syrup and the
wage subsidy are helping Canadians
throughout the country question of
regarding the Bank of Canada nomination
you've been committed some more equality
and diversity across government
positions
why did your government decide to follow
the same model by nominating another
english-speaking man to the role instead
of a francophone or a woman we were
fortunate in this country to have many
extraordinary people qualify or
qualified to head up the Bank of Canada
and we made the determination on who
would be the best to see us through this
difficult time and seven years into the
future as well and I know that TIFF
Macklin will do just that
yeah news have your own report success
we've only
we went through a process we had many
candidates who were interested in the
job and we chose the best person for
this job to help us during this crisis
period and during the years to come TIFF
Macklin will certainly be this person
thank you merci
next question Laura Osmond the Canadian
press line open good morning prime
minister I wanted to ask you about the
EU pledge conference this morning the
money pledged by Canada is sort of money
that's already been announced to the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
estimated I'll take about twenty billion
dollars in the long term to roll out a
vaccine worldwide so my said that Canada
is not bringing more money to the table
and has kind of have been asked to
pledge more in the coming days and weeks
the the pledging conference this morning
was a beginning it was a recognition
that many countries are already stepping
up in developing research and science
towards a global vaccine Canada has made
significant investments as you've
highlighted in our scientists and
researchers who are world class and who
are contributing to finding solutions
not just for Canadians but for the
entire world it is really important that
the world comes together to collaborate
because even once we find a vaccine
whether it's in Canada or elsewhere
around the world we will share that
vaccine in its formula but production of
that vaccine will be extremely important
right around the world as well it cannot
just be the wealthiest countries
producing that vaccine for its citizens
for their citizens we need to ensure
that there are systems in place so that
the billions of people around the world
who are vulnerable can get these
vaccines as well that's why this takes a
global effort and that's why Canada is
so pleased to be able to contribute
through what we're doing here at home
and investments overseas as well and
there will be more to come as the world
grapples with this pandemic
no7 could we know that we have some of
the best scientists in Canada that are
doing extraordinary research to find a
vaccine there are worldwide efforts that
are necessary as well we're funding
research at historic levels here in
Canada to help the world effort but we
also recognize that we will need a lot
of cooperation and coordination on a
worldwide level that is why Canada was
very proud to participate and to
contribute 850 million dollars with
investments especially in Canada but
also internationally to demonstrate that
we are part of this approach to find a
solution we need it for everyone all of
humanity on the emergency financial
benefit will the current benefit
programs be adjusted to account for the
slow and gradual return of people to
work and the fact that it may return to
earning too much income to qualify for
benefits but not enough to sort of get
back to where they were and make ends
meet and pay the bills Laura I really
look forward to facing that challenge of
how we start to scale back the benefits
and help people get back to work
we're not there yet we're very much
still trying to make sure that people
are getting the support they need even
as the economy is starting to gradually
reopen our focus is on keeping people
safe and ensuring that they have the
ability to stay home and pay for
groceries and pay their rents and
support each other
so yes obviously a lot of thought is
going into the various steps that are
going to be needed as we get people out
of their homes and back to work but for
now we're still very much focused on how
we help people through this thank you
next question operator thank you Elsie
parson guess y'all heimo CEO give us and
hello mr. prime minister to continue but
there is a wage subsidy program that for
12 weeks goes until their June the six
are you going to extend these programs I
think that there is a lot we will have
to have discussions over the next steps
we know that eventually people will go
back to work in what sectors in what
regions and how are we going to manage
the shift between the support that we're
sending out to people and a return to
work just these are extremely important
questions for the time being we're still
concentrated on the need to help people
to assist them while the economy is
closed
all these questions around reopening and
gradual return to work will be part of
many discussions with provinces with
sectors and it will be part of our
discussions as a government you also
said in an interview last night that in
hindsight your government should have
done some things differently in its
management of this pandemic could you
tell us exactly what was during an
unprecedented crisis we do our best
[Music]
could we have done some things
differently yes of course and I know
that when everything will be over
many people will make recommendations
we're going to ask for audit an audit
we're going to ask how we can be better
prepared for next time if there is to be
a next time but right now my priority is
to see what do I have to do today and
tomorrow to help Canadians to protect
people to make sure that we get through
this as best possible I don't I spend a
lot of time looking back I try to look
at what we have to do today and in the
weeks to come thank you merci thank you
so Ellen music applause we know mr.
Trudeau I'd like to come back to your
announcement on Friday on assault
weapons we were wondering if there would
be a grandfather clause or not for those
who already have these weapons in their
possession what is your preference do
you think there should be a
grandfathering clause or not and if so
what explanation could you provide to
have these weapons in the possession of
citizens
that's a good question first of all last
week's announcement was that we would
ban the sale of the purchase and the use
of military-style assault weapons and
this is a is an important step to gun
control in the country we were very
pleased to announce this this had been a
problem promised during the election and
we delivered but there are next steps as
as you're indicating in order to see how
things are going to work how will the
buyback program be set up what will be
the measures in place well we have a
grandfathering clause or not and so
we're going to look at the different
parties
we're going to see what works as a
system what's reasonable and what will
protect citizens the most these
discussions will be held at the House of
Commons with different groups that are
concerned by the situation and we will
find adequate answers for Canada
yes but should I understand you talked
about opposition parties so can I
understand and you're in a minority
position so you're not sure to obtain
the support of at least one party to
make five a compulsory or is it a
question of cost are you afraid that
this would be too expensive for the
government because we're already in a
deficit position I think there are many
factors that need to be examined I don't
think it's a only a cost issue I think
that Canadian safety is the absolute
priority and we're going to do what is
necessary we are in a minority
Parliament we need to work with other
parties and I know that the bloc
qubcois and the NDP have a position
that's aligned with ours they want a
greater gun control and I believe that
we'll be able to work together to find
the way forward on banning sorry if we
brought forward important measures on
banning the sale the purchase and the
use of military-style assault weapons in
this country this is a significant step
towards more gun control in this country
and a very important one but there are
many other steps to take and there are
many other many details to be worked out
on exactly how the buyback program will
works whether and what sort of
grandfathering there might be these are
things that we will be working on as we
move forward towards legislation we will
have to work with other parties in the
house not just because we want to
establish a strong consensus but because
in a minority Parliament it is necessary
to get the support of other
they're parties and I know that both of
qubcois and the NDP are very strong
aligned with us in wanting more and
better gun control and we're gonna work
together and I'm sure we're going to be
able to get the right balance for
Canadians to keep people safe in their
communities as we move forward I want
you to see on oil the zoo Canada
radio-canada normally the budget is
tabled in March now we're in May do you
have the intention of tabling a budget
or at least an economic update between
now and June well once you're thinking
about this first of all we are investing
in helping Canadians with billions of
dollars because of the pandemic and each
and every step during press conferences
with what the ministers are saying and
the minister's press conference each
known we are transparent we are being
transparent and what we foresee for the
weeks to come and what we're working on
we will continue to be open and
transparent a budget in normal times is
forecast it's a forecast of of the
measures that will be presented in the
year to come right now we are in a
period of uncertainty extraordinary
uncertainty as to what might happen next
month or in three months
we'll continue to be open and
transparent with the measures taken and
with our forecasts for the economy we'll
find ways to share this with you but
we have not yet been able to determine
what the best way is of looking at a
budget or an economic update or maybe
another way of sharing information with
Canadians as to what we foresee for the
months to come
extremely transparent with a Canadians
about the investments who are making in
this unprecedented times whether it's
the billions of dollars in support for
Canadian families across the country or
measures that we're moving forward with
to support small businesses we have been
announcing just about every single day
me here or ministers what we are doing
and sharing it with Canadians
a budget typically is an expression of
what people can expect in the coming
year both in terms of how the economy is
going to unfold what sort of measures
are going to be brought in and in normal
times it's usually pretty accurate right
now we're in a situation where there is
a tremendous degree of uncertainty as to
what the economy could look like six
months from now what the economy could
look like three months from now what's
gonna happen in the coming weeks so
while we are continuing to be open and
transparent the reflections on at what
point we might be able to present a
budget or even just an economic update
is ongoing we will continue to keep keep
everyone apprised of what we're doing
and what we see coming and we'll
continue to look for ways to share with
Canadians across economic SPR still
reacting and we're not in planning mode
and so at least an economic update is
this out of the question no I'm not
nothing is off the table
I think that we need to be able to
instill confidence in Canadians they
need to feel that we have a plan to
respond to this challenge
ever since the beginning we've been
reacting reacting to the situation that
were in it's an unprecedented situation
we are looking at reopening the economy
how we can position Canada to to get out
of this a pandemic how we're going to
help workers small businesses how we can
make sure that people are able to keep a
link with their employer even if they're
staying at home all these are elements
it's not a reaction but also it's a
preparation it's a preparation for
economic recovery but this works is
ongoing we will always see how we can
ensure that we can provide information
to Canadians I just want to go back to
the question about potential financial
aid for the airline sector Air Canada
posted a first quarter billion dollar
loss or an excess of a billion dollars I
just want you to clarify your answer it
seemed that our bailouts for affected
industries that have been especially
hard hit during this pandemic off the
table is there any possibility outside
of the programs you've already announced
we moved forward very quickly on
supports for workers through the Canada
emergency response benefit and through
the Canada emergency wage subsidy which
is being taken up by companies large and
small across the country including
airlines who see this as a real way of
making sure that when life starts to
return to normal they are able to get
their employees back to work very
quickly this was the emergency priority
that we had as a government to ensure
that Canadians from coast to coast to
coast would be okay to be able to stay
at home to be able to buy their
groceries and support their families and
pay their rents and do the things that
would allow us to stay safe
but we recognize that companies large
and small in various sectors across this
country
are particularly hard hit by covet 19 I
think of the airline industry I think of
the tourism sector I think of the energy
sector and another other significant
sectors that will require more support
on that we will be looking at sectoral
supports we will be making announcements
on that in the coming days or week it is
something we have to get right but we
will be looking at measures to ensure
that some of our most important sectors
for the Canadian economy continue to
stay strong through this this pandemic
and mostly beyond it there are is a
great deal of concern from employees at
the Cargill meat processing plant iRiver
Alberta that are going back to work now
after the plant was shut down because of
the death and multiple cases therefore
kovat 19 you said last week that your
top priority is ensuring worker safety
these workers don't feel safe what more
can the federal government do in terms
of inspecting food processing plants to
ensure the utmost safety during this
time we're working with provinces across
the country to ensure that the supply
chain for agriculture continues and that
worker safety is upheld though that is a
provincial area of responsibility but
the federal government has a role to
play as well particularly around
ensuring that there are adequate
safeguards and PPEs in place one will
remember that the CFIB Canadian food
inspectors are designed to inspect the
food for safety are ensuring that the
way meat is handled the way vegetables
are processed is not putting Canadian
safety at risk the responsibility for
the protection of the workers in that
place is not the primary or hasn't been
the primary responsibility of the CFIB
that is much more our four provincial
labor codes but we will of
be there to support the provinces in its
work to ensure both the continued flow
of supply chains for our for our food
but also the protection of workers who
could be vulnerable right across the
country Canada is concerned with the
health and safety of citizens the
federal government has the
responsibility to make sure that food
that is processed is safe for human
consumption this is the work that is
done by the federal agency responsible
for this it's not a direct
responsibility of the federal agency to
take care of the health of workers this
is under a provincial jurisdiction but
of course the federal government will be
there to help to participate as much as
possible to protect workers in our food
sector we will be there to work hand in
hand with provinces and to protect our
supply chains and to ensure the safety
of the workers Prime Minister a question
about the policing the pandemic report
which shows 5.8 million in fines have
been levied against Canadians for kovat
19 enforcement how do you reconcile the
support the federal government is
providing to Canadians with the fact
that other levels of government are
handing out substantial amounts of fines
I think it's extremely important that
Canadians continue to behave as we have
largely in social distancing in staying
home in keeping ourselves our loved ones
our families our extended families our
seniors our health care workers and our
essential workers at safe from rapid
spread of kovat 19 the federal supports
that we've given to workers to families
to students to people right across the
country have been so that people can
stay home so that they can engage in
social distancing so they do
prevent further spread of kovat 19 and
we are seeing over the past weeks the
curve is flattening and we are on a
positive trajectory we are not out of
the woods however and it requires us to
continue to remain attentive and
vigilant and following the instructions
set out by our public health officials
and that's why different jurisdictions
have different more specific rules as
suitable for their own jurisdictions and
that is also why they have taken it upon
themselves as a responsibility to ensure
that those rules be followed for the
protection of all Canadians on sending
your kids back to school what specific
protections would you want to see in
place so that kids and teachers are safe
I think obviously that's an area of
provincial jurisdiction that I won't
weigh in as Prime Minister but as a
parent I can certainly say that looking
at what sort of social distancing
measures will be in place what are the
kids going to do at recess where the
kids going to do at lunch how many kids
are going to be in a classroom how my
kids are going to be kept safe are
things that all parents are thinking
about and all parents will want to see
that the school system the province the
teachers are grappling with before we
move forward in the next steps and I
know that there are an awful lot of
people at all those different levels
working on that right now good morning
Prime Minister Olivia Stefanovic CBC
News how do you feel about countries
that aren't contributing to this global
pledge but have in the past and how the
means to do so again I think this is a
moment for people to come together and
recognize that we all have ways of
contributing to solving this problem I
think if it's a it is a global pandemic
and what happens outside our borders no
matter how well we handle what's going
on inside our borders will have an
impact on us directly with potential
further spread of kovat 19 or indirectly
with disrupted supply chains and a
weakened global economy upon which we
all defend the
and I think we need to look at doing our
part certainly Canada has a long and
storied tradition now stepping up as we
mark the 75th anniversary of Canadians
liberating the Netherlands tomorrow we
know that Canadians have always stepped
up and will continue to step up because
we recognize that our role within the
world does matter and I would encourage
all countries to see that the only way
we're going to get through this is if we
get through this together on another
matter in Canada women have been hit
harder than men bykova 19 and when you
look at many sectors that employ women
such as the service industry they are
suffering what right now so I'm
wondering how can your government ensure
women aren't set back by this virus well
I think a number of people have talked
about the fact that this this is a
economic crisis that has hit our most
vulnerable and most marginalized peoples
most and women have been extremely hard
hit in the service sector in the home
care sector as well as a number of
marginal and and more challenged
communities whether it be new Canadians
or whether it be young people we need to
make sure and that's why as a government
we've moved forward on protecting
vulnerable people with the Canada
emergency response benefit with extra
help for charitable organizations and
networks that are there to work for each
other one of the things that has been a
real preoccupation for this government
is when we tell people to stay home to
stay safe and their home isn't safe what
do they do the impact of domestic
violence at a time of tremendous stress
and anxiety for all of us in society
that can exacerbate situations of
domestic violence is something that we
are deeply preoccupied with as a country
and as a government that's why we've
made investments in shelters and in
networks to support
women facing fleeing domestic violence
and we will continue how to recognize
that this pandemic isn't hitting
everyone equally that the most
vulnerable as are they as they so often
are more vulnerable and that is why we
have to do everything we can to support
the people who need our help including
and especially women through this work
on their smoking funding we recognize
that this type of crisis and pandemic
doesn't affect everyone the same way
women are extremely vulnerable
oftentimes because of the jobs that were
the first to disappear
also we know that there are many
tensions and and stress in households
due to covert 19 and this can lead to
increased levels of violence what does
someone do if they're told to stay at
home to be safe but their home is not a
safe place the reality of domestic
violence is extremely hard hitting these
days and this is why our government is
investing in shelters in networks to
help women and children who are affected
by gender-based violence or domestic
violence this is a priority for us and
for all Canadians and we will do
everything we can do thank you that is
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau speaking
outside burrito cottage this morning the
last question was about how this crisis
is hitting women far worse than
attending men not only in terms of
health care workers but also as the
Prime Minister talked about domestic
violence happening in in homes we've
seen numbers in terms of domestic
violence calls to shelters up since this
pandemic began let's talk about some of
the other things that he spoke about
we're gonna bring in our Abigail daemon
and David akin who are both standing by
in Ottawa Abigail I'm gonna start with
you and the 850 dollar pledge that was
made the
in this EU hosted telethon Conference of
sorts as it looks for more money this is
not new money is that Abigail eight
hundred and fifty million dollars no
it's absolutely not new money it's all
different pockets of money that had
previously been announced by the Trudeau
government by the EU and this telethon
as you mentioned is looking to raise in
a one day pledge seven and a half
billion euros about eleven plus billion
Canadian dollars I so some questions
there as to whether this commitment from
Canada really counts towards that
one-day goal when it had been previously
committed the Prime Minister was asked
about that he admitted that was sort of
the beginnings first step that lots of
work needs to be done here but he was a
co signatory of the letter that came out
from the EU about this and he was part
of the news conference that the EU held
this morning he made some comments along
with other world leaders that were
streamed across the world
yes notably absent from this was the
Americans of course Donald Trump willing
funding from the whu-oh right now
Abigale a couple other things to talk to
you about and a one is about school and
you just heard the prime minister a few
questions ago he talked about school
reopening and he was asked that
yesterday too
during his media conference for the
second time whether he would send his
own children to school in Quebec what
did he say about it today you know I
found his answer to be interesting on
that front because he made it very clear
off the top he said I'm not answering
this as a prime minister I'm answering
this as a father yeah because he has
been asked a number of times you know
you're a father how do you what do you
think about sending your kids back to
school and he's dodged it too a few
times which was surprising so today he
actually gave a a considerable list of
things that as a father he would think
about before sending his children back
to school how his physical distancing
sharing how are those things going to
work how can you be sure that children
will be kept safe in this environment
and I think those are questions that
every single parent has when they're
making that decision in their own family
so he was more candid today I would say
in his answer but again making it
clear that this is a provincial decision
he's not speaking as a prime minister
but as someone who's a father of three
kids mm-hmm okay Abigail thank you and
we know that schools opening outside of
Montreal next week and then in Montreal
the week after if all goes according to
the plan that the Quebec government has
laid out I want to bring in David akin
now and David let's start with talking
about the federal budget today this
morning we heard Andrew Scheer the
leader of the Conservatives say that he
wants to see more transparency more time
in person in the House of Commons to
poke holes and some of the some of the
ideas Liberal government has how would
this budget even work if it was to
happen what did the Prime Minister say
about that David well the Prime Minister
quite frankly does not know how a
federal budget would work given the
current pandemic given the way the House
of Commons right now is proceeding so
there was sort of two parts of that
answer that the PM had first of all
noting that because it is so uncertain
because there is billions of dollars
going out the door we really can't make
any forecasts about how the economy is
going to respond you know even in the
next two months let alone the next 12
months that forecasting which is a key
part of any federal budget process
I was pretty difficult then there's the
second part and that's a process by
which a budget is normally introduced in
the House of Commons is considered by
members of the House of Commons and
ultimately is voted on by members of the
House of Commons and of course don't
forget that vote would be a confidence
vote it is a minority Parliament after
all and if the government failed to win
the confidence vote then the government
of course could end up well we could be
into an election or who knows what so
what did Andrew Shearer the opposition
leaders say before the PM started today
Shearer is now pressing for a more
normal return to parliamentary life he
doesn't want these you know one
afternoon sessions where everybody's
forced to agree on a bill lickety-split
it was appropriate for some of that
emergency legislation and Shearer I
think is he's signalling that his
patience is sort of at an end for that
process and that would certainly include
a budget but still again the Prime
Minister says can't don't know what a
budgets coming out can't even forecast
when we might get a what's called a
fiscal update which would at least let
us know you know with where we're at and
don't forget in terms of report
we're really now only able to report on
April which was the first full month of
this pandemic really hitting and reeling
affecting the Canadian economy affecting
the Canadian Treasury so it's still
early days in terms of how this pandemic
is going to affect federal financing and
the federal and the Canadian economy one
number that we did get this morning is
from the airline industry Air Canada
losing 1 billion dollars in the first
quarter this year this airline industry
says it's suffering and in fact while we
were on air I got an email from the
national airline counsel representing
all the airlines saying that it's
looking for urgent support and right now
94 percent that's the drop in bookings
and there's a you know ten billion fleet
dollar fleet just sitting there he
didn't commit to any help specifically
for the airline industry but what did he
say David right so all he said to that
when he was asked about help for the
airlines was that they are considering
additional help help beyond say the wage
subsidy program or some of the the new
lines of credit offered by the BDC in
the EDC he said that the government was
considering quote sectoral support and
then he listed three sectors that were
particularly hard-hit Airlines tourism
and the energy sector and we do know
that you know three weeks ago the
finance minister said energy sector help
was I think hours he said hours if not
days away well that was three weeks ago
so we'll see but he's getting asked for
that help don't forget airlines are a
federally regulated business in Canada
and that means that they are shielded to
degree from some kinds of competition
foreign airlines cannot essentially
provide point-to-point traffic within
Canada so for example Toronto to
Vancouver and but for international
airlines who are getting some help from
their governments can't compete with for
instance Air Canada doing Toronto to
Tokyo we'll see I mean the big pressure
for Airlines right now is that the stock
market because Warren Buffett you know
the the wizard in Omaha dumped all his
airline stocks today Berkshire Hathaway
doesn't want any part of the airline
story and so airline stocks are getting
hammered right now and that's that's a
big problem for them too the way we
traveled has certainly is certainly
going to change no matter what David
Aitken thanks so much now just to recap
for you the prime minister was asked
about claims the emergence
see response benefit is keeping some
Canadians from re-entering the workforce
Shearer said that this morning the Prime
Minister says were not there yet and the
economy isn't fully functional Trudeau's
also asked about when we will have a
federal budget and economic update and
again he said we're still in a period of
tremendous uncertainty and he promised
transparency but no timeline thanks for
joining us we have much more on Global
News CA we now return you to your
regularly scheduled programming
[Music]
okay good morning Bonjour hi ma'am Cesar
was at a new doctor
good morning and thank you for coming
today Mental Health Week I know the past
weeks have been difficult for everyone
let's remember to take care of ourselves
and of each other let's remember that
it's okay to ask for help and to feel
sad and frustrated and alone we are all
in this together and while we do need to
practice physical distancing we don't
have to suffer alone there is help out
there for all of us at Sula can again
just say Cosette in tone I know that
these are difficult times for all
Canadians this is Mental Health Week so
let's remember to take care of ourselves
we can all ask for health and it's okay
to feel sad we are all going to get
through this together no one should
suffer alone today we are going to hear
from Canada's chief Public Health
Officer dr. Teresa Tam the deputy chief
public health officer dr. Howard knew it
look was his own Daquan say that I saw
Johnny okay dr. cam please good
afternoon Bonjour - theorists I will
start with the latest numbers and go
with 19 in Canada there are now 59
thousand eight hundred and forty four
confirmed cases including three thousand
seven hundred and sixty six deaths to
date labs across Canada have tested over
nine hundred and nineteen thousand
people for kovat nineteen with just over
a six point five percent of these
testing positive we are at the start of
a new week as as we all inch closer to
social and economic reopening most of us
will be feeling the full gamut of
emotions from excited anticipation to
nervous apprehension all of these
feelings are warranted given the
uncertainties that lay ahead
so there are continuous signs
our efforts have slowed the growth of
Kovan 19 overall in Canada in some
places the epidemic has been brought
under good control and the time is right
for cautious reopening other areas of
the country may not be quite there yet
but we'll follow guided by the careful
assessment of public health authorities
during these many weeks Public Health
tools have helped us to tackle covert 19
spread buying as time to protect and
bolster our healthcare capacity ramp up
research and increase capacity for
testing and tracing going forward
adapting these tools will be a big part
of managing covert 19 for the months
ahead no matter where we live living
with covert 19 is something we all need
to reconcile with this means physical
distancing hand hygiene and cough
etiquette must continue everywhere and
although we'll be getting out of our
homes more and more it will be vitally
important that at the slightest sign of
symptoms we stay home to save lives
working while sick can no longer be a
thing as we move through the weeks ahead
let's not forget we are all in this
together and we'll we'll work our way
through it with good science strong
evidence careful steps and a shared goal
to succeed despite the hardships
together we can do hard things today is
May the fourth
so may the force be with us color force
soir avec nous thank you thank you dr.
Tim dr. new please you maxi bun a premie
d thank you good afternoon
as usual I'll start with the latest
numbers on Kovac 19 in Canada there are
now 59 thousand eight hundred and forty
four confirmed cases including three
thousand seven hundred and sixty-six
deaths to date labs across Canada have
tested over nine hundred and nineteen
people for kovat nineteen with over 6.5
percent of these testing positive we're
at the start of a new week and as we all
in closer to social and economic
reopening Rick most of us will be
feeling
the full gamut of emotions from excited
anticipation to nervous apprehension all
of these feelings are warranted given
the uncertain times that lie ahead there
are continued signs that our efforts
have slowed the growth of covered 19
over all in Canada in some places the
epidemic has been brought under good
control the time is right for a cautious
reopening other areas of the country may
not be quite there yet but we'll follow
dieded by careful assessment of public
health authorities during these many
weeks bubble health public health tools
have helped us to tackle kovat 19 spread
- time to protect and bolster our
healthcare capacity ramped up research
and increased capacity for testing and -
tracing going forward adapting these
tools will be a big part of managing
kovat 19 for the months ahead no matter
where we are living living with Kovac 19
is something we will all need to
reconcile this means physical distancing
hand hygiene and etiquette must continue
everywhere and although we'll be getting
out of our homes more and more it will
be vitally important that the slightest
sign of symptoms we stay home to save
lives working well sick can no longer be
a thing as we move through the weeks
ahead let's not forget we are all in
this together
and we will work our way through it with
good science strong evidence careful and
a shared goal to exceed succeed rather
despite the hardships together we can do
hard things
may the 4th be with us
NASA doc doc new amen thank you doctor
new will now go to Jean Yves du Clos
well thank you Christian and good
afternoon everyone as you know we're
facing a global pandemic that requires
global action when it comes to action
and health and that's why Prime Minister
Trudeau made an important announcement
this morning saying that Canada would
continues to play an important role
internationally despite the issues that
we are facing on the national front
there are some eight hundred million
dollars for testing tracing and
vaccinations in order to prepare for the
production and distribution of products
treatments vaccines that will protect us
and help curious from covert 19 at the
international level and that's why we
also reacted as we saw this morning was
a prime minister nationally and
internationally and with the health
crisis has also come in economic crisis
and I would like briefly to summarize a
few of the emergency response statistics
that we have seen over the last a few
days
first when it comes to helping workers
through the Canada emergency response
benefit a total of 7.3 million Canadians
have received the serb for a total of 10
point 6 million applications second when
it comes to providing help for wage
subsidies emergency wage subsidies as of
third the third of May 96 thousand
applications have been made on the part
of businesses and a total of one 1.7
million workers are being helped through
the emergency wage subsidies and finally
to help support our small businesses in
this very difficult time
through the Canada emergency business
account 518
businesses have applied and have
received a positive response following
their applications for the emergency
business account helping them go through
the crisis in order that when the crisis
is over we can still rely on the great
level of leadership and ability of our
small businesses to grow again the
economy Thank You Christa Maxie Johnny's
ill name it not Thank You Joey
we're now ready to take your questions
our Minister of Health and Heidi is here
to answer questions as well Thank You
Deputy Prime Minister as usual we'll
start on the phone with three questions
before we turn to the room one question
one follow-up operator Thank You Missy
if you have a question please press star
1 on your telephone keypad we have a
question from Laura Osmond from The
Canadian Press please go ahead to line
and open good morning ministers for
anyone couldn't be able to answer the
Chinese embassy says the million math
from China that the public health agency
said couldn't be distributed last week
we're held up by a contractual dispute
and it's been resolved are you able to
elaborate it on all at all on what
happened and what the status of those
masks is now I am we'll have to get
details back to you I'm sorry we don't
have that technical information right
now Laura follow Deputy Prime Minister
Freeland I was wondering if I could ask
you more political question I'm
wondering to what extent you're
concerned about the rhetoric coming from
your policy rivals the Conservatives and
their refusal to express their
confidence in the nation's top doctors
well first of all let me be clear about
one thing which is that to ever impune
the loyalty to Canada of a Canadian
based on their racial or ethnic
background or whether they were born in
this country or emigrated here is
completely unacceptable a Canadian is a
Canadian is
Canadian and I am so confident that the
overwhelming majority of Canadians
understand and believe that when it
comes to the public health officers in
Ottawa and across the country I think
Canada has been very well served by the
dedication and the expertise and the
collaboration of our public health
officers across the country and I think
political leaders across the country
have been really uniform in spending a
lot of time with our public health
officers really working hard to
understand their advice and to listen to
their advice and I think that has served
Canada and Canadians very well Thank You
Deputy Prime Minister operator next
question please thank you the person
just you know in I did but the lappers
can I do the next question is from Lena
deep Canadian Press good morning mr.
Duke so I'd like to go back over the
numbers you just shared with us are very
interesting we talked about 7.3 million
Canadians out of the 10.6 applications
for this herb were there rejections you
also talked about 1.7 million workers
who received the wage subsidy well in
fact what I'm trying to do see whether
people are being transferred from one
program to the other could you please
give some additional details on those
numbers well going to the first question
with respect to the emergency benefit
7.3 million Canadians applied made one
or two applications because the total
number of applications is ten point six
and the applications that came in were
were approved so the difference between
the two numbers is theft
some people have received more than one
payment
as of April 11 people could make put in
a new application in addition to the one
that they had made initially with
respect to the wage subsidy yes 96
thousand companies applied for salaries
paid between March 15th and April 11th
so that covers 1.7 million workers so
1.7 million workers have no need to
apply for the serb question so these
aren't people who were transferred from
one to the other I had another question
a more technical one with respect to the
student emergency benefit now we know
that to school calendars are different
in Quebec they were supposed to be
finishing in May it'll be the end of me
so we'll see job students for example
receive the Bennett for June July August
what about high school students who are
heading off to university will they be
eligible for July in August because
their school year ends at the end of
June well to clarify - to add some
clarity to the first question that you
put it all depends on the workers
circumstances and one situation doesn't
apply to all so some may have received
benefit under the syrup then realized
that the company they're working for
would be playing out emergency subsidies
so then they would be reimbursing or
have already reimbursed the amount they
received because they are now receiving
the wage subsidy now with respect to the
benefit for students what's important is
the time when they complete or finish
their studies and when they would have
normally started looking for a job so
for cgep for exam
in Quebec it's different in Quebec
because outside Quebec there are no sea
chips but once they finish they're here
and they would be looking for a job that
is when they would become eligible for
the emergency benefit for students with
respect to secondary or high school
students who have finished their year
and planned to go on to post-secondary
studies outside of Quebec it's normally
at the end of June that they would
become eligible and - for university
students it is at the start of May Thank
You Minister we'll go to the operator
for the next question thank you maybe
the next question is from Loren gardener
from Politico please go ahead Delaney is
not open thanks this question is for dr.
cam you talked a lot about the need for
Canada to ramp up testing to 60,000 a
day and I'm wondering when you think
that Canada can get that point and what
until then what needs to be done to get
there so yes so I think this increased
testing as you've seen a day over day so
I think the common goal is to increase
that 60,000 is just the the capacity
target for the provinces and territories
based on the existing public health
laboratory capacity but we're
investigating any other Avenue for
increasing lab testing including a point
of care and also the role of serologic
testing when they do come on board I
think it's not a magic number that is a
capacity number you do have to test the
right people at the right place at the
right time according to the epidemiology
of the provinces so they have to adapt
their testing strategy based on what
they're seeing is very different from a
jurisdiction that have no cases and no
community transmission but there's
increased testing of course being ramped
up for example in Quebec particularly in
communities where there's been more
reporting of cases so I know that chief
medical officers and provincial public
health authorities are very
with the need to use testing to inform
the next stage so I think we would
expect to provide as much support as we
can from the federal level to enable
that to happen so but every day is I
think miss Hardy will attest we're
constantly monitoring every bit of the
supply chain and every day there may be
something that we need to tackle
together so that's just a sort of daily
reality of the supply issue but we're
also tackling supplies from a domestic
manufacturing ramped up as well so I
think a lot of those trajectories means
that we can absolutely be increasing
testing in Canada the Deputy Prime
Minister I'm wondering kind of what what
is the next stage of Canada's engagement
with the US on the Cova 19 response just
given looking at the large caseload in
the US and the differences between the
states on what some are doing in terms
of promoting physical distancing versus
moving to reopen economies and the the
impact that could have on Canada as we
further along and get further away from
the immediate public health response do
you have any thoughts about what might
need to change in terms of Canada's
collaboration or interactions with the
US on on Kovan um so let me just start
by commenting a little bit on the
premise of the question the idea that
there would be a next stage the reality
is that the Canadian relationship with
the United States is so close and there
is a connection and an interdependence
on so many levels that this is a
relationship that we are working on
literally every day even every hour and
not only at the federal level the
Premier's are very engaged particularly
in working with the governors of their
border states mayors are involved
business people's are involved so it's
something that is happening every single
day every single hour and that is
exactly as it ought to be and it's a
relationship when it comes to
coronavirus that has a lot of different
aspects to it there is obviously the
border relationship and I think that
that is working out today very well for
both countries
we have told Canadians we've asked
Canadians to stay at home and it's been
very neighborly to offer that same
approach when it comes to our American
neighbors at the same time essential
Travel is still happening and that is
happening really effectively and that is
so important for things like being sure
that we have groceries in our grocery
stores we also have been working really
effectively when it comes to the medical
equipment supply chain so this is an
ongoing relationship it is something
that is a priority for any Canadian
government very much including this one
and it's going to develop as the
situation with the corona virus and on
many other issues develops matter I'm
nervous / munis now turn to the rooms
telling what Julia venti was in from CBC
Julie Van Deusen CBC I think it's for
Teresa Tam or for patty high do so
President Trump says he believes that
Cova 19 is the result of a horrible
mistake in China that he and Mike Pompeo
have evidence that it originated in
Wuhan lab what's the government's view
where did it where did it come from how
did it start well I'll start and I'll
turn to dr. Tam as she's been actively
involved in monitoring the illness since
first 1st May disappearance back in
December there will be time obviously
and a lot of interest and importance to
understand how this virus became
prevalent in the human species and I
think those questions are being asked
rightfully so certainly the research and
scientists community is all over it and
trying to understand where the virus
originated from and how it's evolved and
mutated since it's been present in
humans but for me as the Minister of
Health and certainly as the Government
of Canada although those questions are
important because they will help us
prevent future outbreaks and understand
what we can learn from this particular
virus what's even more important right
now is to stay focused on Canadians
health and helping Canadians get through
the the outbreak that were in now how we
flatten the curve together and how we
protect and strengthen the health and
social fabric of our communities and so
that's the work that I remain focused on
dr. Tam did you have anything further to
add about your work I don't think we've
seen any specific information to say
that this is a laboratory accident or
release but I at the same time we don't
know the exact origins of this virus of
course with the hypothesis is it comes
from a reservoir like bats it's very
likely to have involved another animal
somewhere in between the zoonotic or
animal to human transmission so that
question hasn't actually been answered
fully as yet so I think there's a lot of
work including genetic analysis and war
collection of animal and other data
there is a international constructs with
Hawaii WH o and and and others just to
try and get to the bottom of the sort of
where that zoonotic transmission occurs
so I think the natural history of the
evolution of this virus will you know
may be found in the upcoming months but
sometimes you actually might not find
that unto many months later the SARS
virus was the same thing yet is to trace
back do a lot of sort of analysis in
order to come up with a hypothesis so
I'm not sure that this is something that
will be you know immediately obvious but
work is continuing on that front
okay so I didn't hear the words wet
market so it seems that it's not 100%
clear where it came from and on
a similar kind of vein it wasn't so long
ago and I guess the question is either
for Teresa Tam or patty high do it
wasn't so long ago that the government
said temperature taking was not reliable
there was no reason to take people's
temperatures when they came into the
country that was maybe a couple of
months ago now Air Canada you won't be
able to get on a plane unless you have
your temperature taken you're wearing a
mask so I guess I'm wondering do you
regret being so definitive or is it just
really hard to get your footing when it
comes to this virus well it's a novel
virus undergoes a lot of evolution in
terms of knowledge but the more you
actually understand this virus the more
you begin to know that temperature
taking is not effective at all you know
in terms of people coming across even if
you're infected
we know that the likelihood of picking
up someone who's symptomatic is sort of
relatively inefficient and so
temperature screening alone is not going
to add to that and if we had a
significant number of a symptomatic or
pre-symptomatic people that also even
reduces even the effectiveness even more
I think the the most important aspect
our current response is ensure that
incoming travelers undergo the mandatory
14 day quarantine so that within those
14 days if you had the temperature if
you had any other symptoms you can be
safely managed and that you reduce
spread to the rest of the population so
that is really the fundamental aspect of
our border health response right now
thank you doctor mr. chase I Steven
Chase Globe and Mail my question is for
the deputy prime minister in 2017 your
government famously said that you would
welcome people from around the world
refugees were fleeing persecution and
other dangers as we reported today 46
Hong Kong residents Hong Kong residents
who took part many of whom took part in
the massive demonstrations that began
there last year have now submitted
claims for asylum in Canada
they're citing harassment by police and
police brutality and they're citing
fears of unjust prosecution Canada has a
large and and lengthy history of
cantonese immigration to canada and i
wanted to ask you is there a place for
these protesters in canada well thank
you for your question steve and on
specific asylum claims that's an issue
that needs to be adjudicated very
carefully and very thoughtfully
certainly not via press conference but
let me say about the hong kong canadians
that you're quite right that canada has
benefited hugely from the immigration of
people from hong kong to canada they
contribute tremendously to our society
and i think all of us are very very glad
that so many people from hong kong have
chosen to make their home in their lives
here just to follow a question i think
one of the issues that's going to be
debated more and more over the next few
months and years and I don't think these
46 are certainly the end of this is does
Hong Kong's political and legal system
give rise to the possibility of cear of
a serious possibility of persecution
what are your thoughts on that look when
it comes to Hong Kong Canada's position
is clear and a very long standing we
have supported consistently the one
country two systems policy I made a
number of statements about that as
foreign minister and Francois Philippe
vampire our foreign minister has
continued to be clear about that and
because of the large number of Canadians
who live in Hong Kong Canada does have a
particular interest in the situation
there Thank You Deputy Prime Minister
Kevin Kevin Gallagher with CTV News this
is directed at the Deputy Prime Minister
but feel free to answer it because it
does have some other implications for
the Health Minister approach dr. Tam
there was a tomb
or cell phone towers in Quebec that were
burnt down there's one on Friday there's
concern that it links back to a
conspiracy theory that the corona virus
is spread through 5g networks the
question though is how has
misinformation that we have seen
throughout this pandemic hindered or
presented a challenge to get out
effective Public Health information to
to people about this outbreak we'll all
starts and then my colleagues may want
to chip in as well the incident to which
you refer is of course regrettable and
there have been similar incidents in
other countries to of course
misinformation is especially dangerous
at a time like this when all of us are
concerned quite rightly and when all of
us are being asked to radically change
our behaviors and radically change the
way our daily lives operate so it's a
time of both heightened anxiety and
tremendous change and so disinformation
can have a particularly pernicious
effect we as a government are working
very hard to push back against that
disinformation I think that's why all of
us are here right now and I would like
to really also recognize the very
important role the provinces and public
health officials in the provinces are
playing in that effort and I do also
want to say I think Canadians have been
great Canadians are really smart
Canadians are really well informed and
while inevitably they're going to be
individual moments where people fall
prey to disinformation
by and large I think as a country people
are making really smart decisions and
those smart decisions those smart
well-informed decisions are saving lives
I don't know patty Theresa do you want
to add anything quickly say that I think
it's quite normal during a period of
such
uncertainty and anxiety to look for
answers I think people want to know I
keep saying this the question I hear in
many different guises is when will all
this be over you know how did this
happen and when will all this be over
and I think they're questions that you
know are top of mind for Canadians as
they're stuck at home as their
livelihoods have changed as they're so
many mothers that I know parenting and
trying to work at the same time fathers
too you know the the situation has
changed tremendously for people and that
uncertainty drives I think a quest for
knowledge or a quest for understanding
you know how did we get here and how do
we get out and that's why we've tried so
diligently not just through press
conferences but things like making sure
we have the Canada Cova 19 app that we
disseminate information through the
website that we provide transparent
information that when we don't know we
say we don't know and when we you know
when we have new information we present
it quickly to the public there is a
whole field of communications called
risk communications certainly experts
know that it's really important that you
are available for example that you tell
the truth and that when you don't know
the answer you say don't know the answer
and so we certainly try to continue to
follow those principles so that
Canadians can have confidence in our
government but also have confidence in
in what we keep saying which is that we
will get through this together as a
country just to follow up and with
provinces opening businesses or
loosening restrictions there are
concerns that as people start to get
back to what would be more of a regular
routine that some of the new habits that
have been picked up physical distancing
for example may become eroded as time
goes on so what are the main points that
Canadians who are living in provinces
that are starting to loose and
restrictions need to keep in mind to
keep themselves safe and to ensure the
the spread of the virus is as low as
possible well I think the first thing
Canadians need to remember is it's not
over it is a cautious reopening in
certain provinces and certain sectors
but that the new normal will have to
include new ways of live
new ways of working that will protect us
in this unique and difficult time if we
as we know as we suspect ice I would say
a large portion of Canadians haven't
been exposed to Kovan 19 which means
that we don't have widespread immunity
across the country and we've done a
really good job as Canadians holding the
line flattening the curve reducing that
transmission rate but the continuation
of that depends on us being extremely
careful in these with these new with
these new I guess permissions from
public health that we can proceed to go
back to work in certain settings that we
can proceed to go back to school in
certain settings but that we will have
to follow the advice and guidance of
public health nonetheless and I think
for governments what that means is we'll
need to repeat and provide that
information in a variety of different
ways you'll probably see a lot more
Government of Canada and provincial and
territorial advertising about the
importance to continue to wash your
hands and sustain me ters apart and to
cover your coughs appropriately and your
coffin to your sleeve and and to most
essentially not go to work or go to
school if you're sick and I think those
messages you hear dr. Tam repeat every
day they often are not I think what
people want to hear they want the magic
solution but the magic solution really
is all of us continuing these practices
that we've adopted and become somewhat
used to over the last several months dr.
Tam did you want to add anything yeah
it's gonna be difficult but I think keep
on sustaining our message is about
continuing the the new things that
you've learned I think in the last few
months about personal hygienic practices
definitely staying home you're sick and
the practicing physical distancing but
it I think the public does have to be
supported to do so as well
so for businesses we know that we're the
departments and territories asking for
very specific plans in terms of how do
you re start certain say non-essential
businesses safely so that the customers
are also nudged into doing the right
thing like you know how you paste the
number of people in your store
you set things up so that people reduce
the risk of transmission hi hand hygiene
stations you know in different places as
you've seen I think will continue and
needs to continue and but I think a lot
of the creativity and the innovation
that has actually occurred in the last
several months I think really needs to
be catalyzed some of the teleworking
telemedicine and you know being able to
access services in different ways well I
hope continue you need to build on the
momentum of those innovations in order
to help people adjust to this living
with the virus so so we will you'll hear
us in a very boring way repeating those
messages again and again employers of
course need to be able to support in
government's in helping people to stay
home when they're sick that is not an
easy thing to do that's probably the
most difficult habit to sever and but
people have to be able to do it with the
support of their workplace or their
schools or the environment that they are
working on and then of course we know
about the issues that's characterized
this epidemic which consists of
supporting those most vulnerable and in
harvest settings and those must also
continue as well but I think Canadians
have so far been great and that we you
know with with more reinforcement
they'll be able to continue to adjust
and adapt and I think it's just adapting
and adjusting in a very slow way and
cautious ways how public health isn't
visit and visiting things the other
thing is the balance of physical or
mental health and all the other
dimensions as well so that there are
some habits that we may have had which
was good for us and we diminished them I
certainly know I've exercised less but
you know sort of rien lighting some of
those preventive measures I think is
very important
merci docteur Moreno Antonio telephone
Fort Huachuca
thank you thank you doctor go to the
phone for three questions the next
question is from Jamie do you have the
floor question good afternoon
with respect to the production of a
vaccine collection initiative was
launched today and there will be a
number of steps involved some will have
access to it before others even though
we want everyone to have access to it
they will have to be a priority order
how will we determine who has first
access to the vaccine before I answer
your question about access I think it's
important to underscore the fact
cooperation because research is being
done everywhere and here in Canada with
research and in a spirit of sharing data
say with the view to developing a
vaccine technique now there are a number
of technical aspects people are saying
that it will take between 12 and 18
months to do so for scientists I think
it's always based on the concept that
the vaccine will be available for
everyone worldwide with respect to to
details on production how will be
distributed etc those are issues that I
can't answer now personally but with
good cooperation and collaboration
across the world we will come up with
solutions to ensure that everyone who
needs a vaccine
develop a vaccine once we've developed a
vaccine we'll have access to it thank
you
follow-up question yes go in English
because maybe Minister I do can answer
about this once a vaccine will be found
by a country or the other or different
countries together there will be
countries who will have means to produce
a certain quantity of vaccines faster
than others so I know that we are not
there yet but how are we planning this
right in some ways we're not there yet
but in other ways we're preparing to be
there for when a vaccine is created and
how we do that is as dr. new pointed out
we work together with countries so that
the research is pooled and there's a
collective I suppose shared ownership if
you will of the findings of the research
and the discovery of potential vaccine
candidates but also we're funding a
number of Canadian companies who are
doing research on vaccine like of
seluruh which was part of the
conversation or the announcement today
looking at as well as candidates for
people that will not only be able to
find the vaccine but then produced the
vaccine with their partners across the
country and all of that work is very
important it is almost like a race but a
race where you want everyone to be able
to cross the finish line at once and so
we know here in Canada that as long as
kovat is raging out of control in
another country Canadians will not be
safe and that's why the spirit of
collaboration that dr. new spoke about
is so important because yes of course
every country wants to find a vaccine
and vaccinate their citizens but there
will always be risk to every population
if we don't consider the world health
and the global health and that's why I
think it's so exciting to be part of an
international effort as well as the
domestic support for companies and and
researchers that are that are working so
hard here in Canada
q Minister operator next question thank
you ma'am the next question is from
Jessica Murphy from BBC please go ahead
yes hi thank you I'm just wondering what
you can tell me on a federal level
what's being done in terms of emergency
preparedness obviously we're already in
flood season as we saw with Fort Mac but
also you know we're coming up on
wildfire hurricane season so what's
being done amid this pandemic at the
federal level for that preparedness
that's a great question Jessica and it
is something we are very very focused on
every spring the Minister of Public
Safety and emergencies puts together a
plan working with the Minister of
Defense to respond to potential floods
and forest fires this year was no
exception and in fact this year those
preparations have had the added element
of a very deep appreciation that
coronavirus would add a level of
complexity to the response for example
when it comes to being really thoughtful
about places where people who may need
to leave a place where there is flooding
or a place where there is a forest fire
having places where they can go
obviously
this period of physical distancing means
that we have to be particularly
thoughtful about making provision for
those kinds of things but we are you
know we are very aware that flood season
and then forest fire season is upon us
and have been working very hard in
collaboration with the provinces to be
ready I yes thank you I do have a quick
follow-up I know in the US for example
FEMA is looking at the complexities for
example of getting people out of
hospitals during this time and getting
people out of long care long-term care
facilities and that kind of thing I
wonder if there's anything specific
that's being looked at in Canada in a
similar way any of the challenges
or any any things we looked at on at
that level sure of course I mean the
issue of what you do with housing people
who may need to leave areas of flooding
or forest fires is a really really
important one and so of course is the
issue of taking care of and moving
people who are particularly vulnerable
so for sure that's part of the planning
Thank You Deputy Prime Minister operator
next questions is thank you the next
question is from Mary Vestal learn more
about the devil we wanna make it a poor
madam for my question is for Miss
Freeland I'd like to go back head to the
ban on assault weapons that the
government announced on Friday for
months now the government has talked
about those weapons not being used for
hunting so why is there an exemption for
an amnesty period for two years
indigenous communities or people who are
hunting if you could comment on that
[Music]
thank you for the question I think our
announcement on Friday week was an
historic moment with respected to the
exception for indigenous communities it
is an issue of constitutional rights for
indigenous peoples I think that all
Canadians
understand that we must pay particular
attention to that including their right
to subsistence hunting and that is the
reason why the exception was included
thank you sweetie follow-up question
another question for you miss Freeland
- no or to have an update on the
negotiation so with the provinces when
it comes to bonuses for essential
workers for a month now they've been
discussing the issue with the provinces
there was a call with the provincial
leaders at the end of last week did you
reach an agreement and if yes can you
tell us when the pay bonus will be paid
by Ottawa to the provinces for essential
workers answer another good question
thank you we have an agreement in
principle between the federal government
and the provinces at the federal level
we understand that each province has
specific measures some provinces have
already provided a bonus to essential
workers we're continuing to work out the
details but that doesn't prevent the
provinces from going forward and the
federal government is here to help the
provinces we feel that it is very
important for Canadians for people doing
such important work many of the people
doing these jobs are not well paid and
therefore it's very important to provide
additional support question so there
isn't an agreement than if I understand
what you're saying yeah I wouldn't say
that there is an agreement in principle
but for each province it's an issue of
working out the details Thank You Deputy
Prime Minister dr. Tam so what are your
thoughts on problems so some some are
doing really great some are still
struggling with the with the virus so
what do you
thoughts about the provinces reopening
the ones that are having a harder time
while the virus is still spreading
around so I think with chief medical
officers with established certain
criteria but they have to be applied
within the context of the local
epidemiology and what's going on it's
quite a complex decision as you can
imagine balancing of course the fact
that you need to have these cases under
control your ICU has got to be at good
capacity but also that you have testing
and contact tracing capacity in place so
it's quite complicated and every areas
gonna be different even within the
single province you may have different
situations so as the level of
flexibility that is required because
what we don't want is to continually
sort of close everything well you know
in that particular location it may be
safe to do so so I think that that is
actually important because there are
actual potential negative consequences
of course whether it be mental health or
other issues and I think my colleagues
are very seized with that aspect as well
because if if you don't return certain
activities to a you know sort of living
with Colvin normal now then the
consequences are quite could be quite
severe some of the key areas of initial
reopening that they are considering of
course is the non urgent medical care
people getting outside because
transmission outdoors is less of a risk
but you try to maintain that 2 meter
distance so these are the kind of
decisions that they're going through but
again what I know for sure is
everybody's gonna be cautious about this
so slowly carefully see what happens and
then do the next step I think is a
characteristic of all of the plans okay
but what if once once we reopen up and
people become impatient with the
confidence
because now they're free you and and
they want to just return to normal and
they throw those measures out the window
what happens then is to say the the
province is going to be very careful
they have quite powerful local public
health laws and we you know guidance and
what they expect businesses schools
workplaces to do the moment they think
something isn't going right they're
going to be readjusting you know you're
dialing up or down some of these
measures and so depending on how your
population is adjusting they're gonna
have to flexibly look at well do we need
to tighten things up again
mamie be looking at the cases and the
epidemiology for sure so and I do know
that every community and its makeup
might be quite different so a very big
city like Toronto might be quite
different from a very small jurisdiction
but I think that at the local level
they'll be watching very carefully they
can reinstate certain measures for sure
if the things are not going well thank
you doctor sashimi fella co-founder
Christmasy